Strong tree signing (#436)
mlswg/mls-protocol: draft-ietf-mls-protocol.md

### Using Parent Hashes

The Parent Hash of P appears in three types of structs. If V is itself a parent node
then the P's Parent Hash is stored in the `parent_hash` fields of both V's
`ParentHashInput` struct and V's `ParentNode` struct. (The `ParentNode` struct is
used to encapsulate all public information about V that must be conveyed to a new
member joining the group as well as to define the Tree Hash of node V.)

If, on the other hand, V is a leaf and its KeyPackage contains the `parent_hash`
extension then the Parent Hash of P (with V's sibling as co-path child) is stored in
that field. In particular, the extension MUST be present in the `leaf_key_package`
field of an `UpdatePath` object. (This way, the signature of such a KeyPackage also
serves to attest to which keys the group member introduced into the ratchet tree and
to whom the corresponding secret keys were sent. This helps prevent malicious insiders
from constructing artificial ratchet trees with a node V whose HPKE secret key is
known to the insider yet where the insider isn't assigned a leaf in the subtree rooted
at V. Indeed, such a ratchet tree would violate the tree invariant.)

### Verifying Parent Hashes

> To this end, when processing a Commit message clients MUST recompute the
> expected value of `parent_hash` for the committer's new leaf and verify that it
> matches the `parent_hash` value in the supplied `leaf_key_package`. Moreover, when
> joining a group, new members MUST authenticate each non-blank parent node P. A parent
> node P is authenticated by checking that it has children V and S such that V's
> `ParentNode` struct has its `parent_hash` field set to the Parent Hash of P with
> Co-Path Child S.

Reviewer: This section should address the problem noted in #435.  Namely, `V` should either be `left(P)` or `left^k(right(P)`, for the smallest possible `k >= 0`. Suggested text:

```suggestion
To this end, when processing a Commit message clients MUST recompute the
expected value of `parent_hash` for the committer's new leaf and verify that it
matches the `parent_hash` value in the supplied `leaf_key_package`. Moreover, when
joining a group, new members MUST authenticate each non-blank parent node P. A parent
node P is authenticated by performing the following check: 

* Let L and R be the left and right children of P, respectively
* If L.parent_hash is equal to the Parent Hash of P with Co-Path Child R, the check passes 
* If R is blank, replace R with its left child until R is either non-blank or a leaf node
* If R is a leaf node, the check fails
* If R.parent_hash is equal to the Parent Hash of P with Co-Path Child L, the check passes
* Otherwise, the check fails

The left-child recursion under the right child of P is necessary because the expansion of 
the tree to the right due to Add proposals can cause blank nodes to be interposed 
between a parent node and its right child. 
```

cc @MartaMularczyk @dajost

Author: Nice! Looks good to me.

opaque key_id<0..2^16-1>;
~~~~~

## Parent Hash {#parent-hash}

Consider a ratchet tree with a parent node P and children V and S. The parent hash
of P changes whenever an `UpdatePath` object is applied to the ratchet tree along
a path traversing node V (and hence also P). The new "Parent Hash of P (with Co-Path
Child S)" is obtained by hashing P's `ParentHashInput` struct using the resolution
of S to populate the `original_child_resolution` field. This way, P's Parent Hash
fixes the new HPKE public keys of all nodes on the path from P to the root.
Furthermore, for each such key PK the hash also binds the set of HPKE public keys
to which PK's secret key was encrypted in the commit packet that anounced the
`UpdatePath` object.

~~~~~
struct {
    HPKEPublicKey public_key;
    opaque parent_hash<0..255>;
    HPKEPublicKey original_child_resolution<0..2^32-1>;
} ParentHashInput;
~~~~~

The Parent Hash of P with Co-Path Child S is the hash of a `ParentHashInput` object
populated as follows. The field `public_key` contains the HPKE public key of P. If P

> is the root then `parent_hash` is set to the all-zeroes vector of size `Nh`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is the root, then `parent_hash` is set to a zero-length octet string.
```

Otherwise `parent_hash` is the Parent Hash of P's parent with P's sibling as the
co-path child.

Finally, `original_child_resolution` is the array of `HPKEPublicKey` values of the
nodes in the resolution of S but with the `unmerged_leaves` of P omitted. For
example, in the ratchet tree depicted in {{resolution-example}} the
`ParentHashInput` of node 5 with co-path child 4 would contain an empty
`original_child_resolution` since 4's resolution includes only itself but 4 is also
an unmerged leaf of 5. Meanwhile, the `ParentHashInput` of node 5 with co-path child

> 6 has an array with one element in it; namely the HPKE public key of 6.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6 has an array with one element in it: the HPKE public key of 6.
```

### Using Parent Hashes

The Parent Hash of P appears in three types of structs. If V is itself a parent node

> then the P's Parent Hash is stored in the `parent_hash` fields of both V's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then P's Parent Hash is stored in the `parent_hash` fields of both V's
```

## Parent Hash

The `parent_hash` extension serves to bind a KeyPackage inserted as part of an
`UpdatePath` during a commit to the rest of the HPKE keys in that update path.
Moreover, for each of those keys `parent_hash` also binds the set of parties
that were told the corresponding secret key. This helps new members joining a group
verify the tree invariant. That is, it prevents malicious members from

> constructing an artificial ratchet tree with a node v whose HPKE secret key is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constructing an artificial ratchet tree with a node whose HPKE secret key is
```

known to the malicious member yet where the member is not assigned a leaf in the

> subtree rooted at v. (Indeed, such a ratchet tree would violate the tree

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
corresponding subtree. (Indeed, such a ratchet tree would violate the tree
```

Author: I'm not a fan of "corresponding" subtree because its a bit imprecise since we dont define what the correspondence is. I find "subtree rooted at v" clearer. Alternatively we could define "corresponding subtree" somewhere but my preference is to not introduce new (e.g. graph theory) terminology whenever standard terms can be used to the same end.

invariant.)

~~~~~
opaque parent_hash<0..255>;
~~~~~

This extension MUST be present in the `leaf_key_package` Key Package field of an
`UpdatePath` object. When processing a Commit message clients MUST recompute the 
expected value of `parent_hash` for the committer's new leaf and verify that it 
matches the `parent_hash` value in the `leaf_key_package`. Moreover, when joining

> a group new members MUST verify that if a leaf contains a `parent_hash` value than

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a group new members MUST verify that if a leaf contains a `parent_hash` value, then
```

it matches the value obtained by recomputing `parent_hash` at the leaf.

> The `parent_hash` at the root is `0`. To compute the parent hash at a non-root

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `parent_hash` at the root is a zero-length bit string. To compute the parent hash at a non-root
```

Reviewer 2: I've always been trying to use zero-length octet strings instead of "0" because "0" is ambiguous to me. For `Nh`-long all-zero string, I don't think we've used that anywhere else. Probably just because it's wordier

Author: My (weak) preference is to use an Nh long all-zero string. But only because that makes it the right data type for the output of a hash function (in contrast to the empty string).

> node v with parent p and sibling u the `ParentHashInput` struct is used. It

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
node V with parent P and sibling S, the `ParentHashInput` struct is used. It
```

> consists of three fields. The first contains the HPKE public key of p. The second

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consists of three fields: The first contains the HPKE public key of P. The second
```

> contains the `parent_hash` at p. The third contains the list of HPKE public

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contains the `parent_hash` at P. The third contains the list of HPKE public
```

> keys to which the HPKE secret key of v's parent was sent. That is, it consists of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
keys to which the HPKE secret key of P was sent to. That is, it consists of
```

> the array of `HPKEPublicKey` values of the nodes in the resolution of u but with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the array of `HPKEPublicKey` values of the nodes in the resolution of U, with
```

> the`unmerged_leaves` of P omitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `unmerged_leaves` of P omitted.
```

> the keys of p's `unmerged_leaves` omitted. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the`unmerged_leaves` of P omitted. 
```

For example, in the ratchet tree depicted in {{resolution-example}} the
`ParentHashInput` struct for node 6 would contain an empty array as the sibling of
6 is node 4 which has only itself in its resolution and node 4 is also an unmerged
leaf for 6's parent node 5. Meanwhile, the `ParentHashInput` of node 1 has an
array with the HPKE public key's of nodes 5 and 6.

~~~~~
struct {
	HPKEPublicKey parents_public_key;
	opaque parents_parent_hash<0..255>;
	HPKEPublicKey original_sibling_resolution<0..2^32-1>;
} ParentHashInput;

> ~~~~~

Reviewer: It seems a little odd that we have a pointer "across" the tree here, from a node to its sibling.  Would it work to move the resolution to the parent?  So the ParentHashInput would say, "this public key under this parent, with the private key encrypted to this resolution".  Together with the above suggestions, you would end up with something like:

```
struct {
  HPKEPublicKey public_key;     // from parent
  opaque parent_hash<0..255>;   // from parent
  opaque resolution_hash<0..8>; // from non-updated child
} ParentHashInput;
```

Then your validity check for a non-blank parent node is that for one of its children:
```
one_child.parent_hash = H(ParentHashInput{public_key, parent_hash, other_child.resolution_hash})
```

> ~~~~~

Author: Re: Validation. Yes, i think the same validation algo should work as before. And I agree text describing validation is necessary. Just not sure where to put that. Could put it in the Parent Hash section but maybe its more appropriate when describing how to process commit packets and how to join a group? (Group members should check that the parent_hash in the commitors key package checks out by recomputing it and comparing to whats in the key package. New members should check that the parent hash of each internal node is stored at one of its two children.)

        case 1: T value;
    }
} optional<T>;

struct {
    HPKEPublicKey public_key;
    uint32 unmerged_leaves<0..2^32-1>;
    opaque parent_hash<0..255>;

> } ParentNode;

Reviewer 2: This struct got deleted but is still referenced in several places

Reviewer: Yeah, I think we still need this one.  It goes in the syntax for how you send the tree to a new member.

> The tree hash a leaf node is the hash of leaf's `LeafNodeHashInput` object which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tree hash of a leaf node is the hash of leaf's `LeafNodeHashInput` object which
```

struct {
    uint32 node_index;
    optional<KeyPackage> key_package;
} LeafNodeHashInput;
~~~~~

Note that the `node_index` field contains the index of the leaf among the nodes
in the tree, not its index among the leaves; `node_index = 2 * leaf_index`.

Now the tree hash of any non-leaf node is recursively defined to be the hash of

> its `ParentNodeTreeHashInput`. This includes an optional `ParentNodeTreeHashData`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its `ParentNodeTreeHashInput`. This includes an optional `ParentNode`
```

I prefer "ParentNode", since we use this for sending the tree as well as hashing.

object depending on if the node is blank or not.

~~~~~

> struct {
> 	HPKEPublicKey public_key;
> 	opaque parent_hash<0..255>;
>     uint32 unmerged_leaves<0..2^32-1>;
> } ParentNodeTreeHashData;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
struct {
    HPKEPublicKey public_key;
    opaque parent_hash<0..255>;
    uint32 unmerged_leaves<0..2^32-1>;
} ParentNode;
```

    children are non-empty and have the hash of this node set as their
    `parent_hash` value (if the child is another parent) or has a `parent_hash`
    extension in the KeyPackage containing the same value (if the child is a

>     leaf). If either of the node's children is empty, and in particular does not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    leaf). If either of the node's children are empty, and in particular does not
```

Reviewer: No, the subject which which the verb must agree is "either" (singular), not "children" (plural).
